King Edward
Since they refuse our proffered league, my lord,
And will not ope their gates and let us in,
We will entrench ourselves on every side
That neither victuals nor supply of men
May come to succor this accursèd town;
Famine shall combat where our swords are stopped.
Enter six poor Frenchmen.
Derby
The promised aid that made them stand aloof
Is now retired and gone another way;
It will repent them of their stubborn will. --
But what are these poor ragged slaves, my lord?
King Edward
Ask what they are; it seems they come from
Calais.
Derby
You wretched patterns of despair and woe,
What are you, living men or gliding ghosts,
Crept from your graves to walk upon the earth?
1 Poor Frenchman
No ghosts, my lord, but men that breathe a life
Far worse than is the quiet sleep of death.
We are distressèd poor inhabitants
That long have been diseasèd, sick and lame,
And now because we are not fit to serve,
The captain of the town hath thrust us forth
That so expense of victuals may be saved.
King Edward
A charitable deed no doubt, and worthy praise!
But how do you imagine then to speed?
We are your enemies in such a case;
We can no less but put ye to the sword,
Since when we proffered truce, it was refused.
1 Poor Frenchman
And if your grace no otherwise vouchsafe,
As welcome death is unto us as life.
King Edward
Poor silly men, much wronged and more distressed.
Go, Derby, go, and see they be relieved;
Command that victuals be appointed them
And give to every one five crowns a-piece.
[Exeunt Derby and Frenchmen.]
The lion scorns to touch the yielding prey,
And Edward's sword must fresh itself in such
As wilful stubbornness hath made perverse.
Enter Lord Percy.
Lord Percy, welcome. What's the news in England?
Percy
The Queen, my lord, comes here to your grace,
And from her highness and the lord vicegerent
I bring this happy tidings of success:
David of Scotland, lately up in arms,
Thinking belike he soonest should prevail,
Your highness being absent from the realm,
Is by the fruitful service of your peers --
And painful travail of the Queen herself
That, big with child, was every day in arms --
Vanquished, subdued, and taken prisoner.
King Edward
Thanks, Percy, for thy news with all my heart.
What was he took him prisoner in the field?
Percy
A squire, my lord; John Copland is his name,
Who since entreated by her majesty,
Denies to make surrender of his prize
To any but unto your grace alone,
Whereat the Queen is grievously displeased.
King Edward
Well then we'll have a pursuivant dispatched
To summon Copland hither out of hand,
And with him he shall bring his prisoner king.
Percy
The Queen's, my lord, herself by this at sea,
And purposeth as soon as wind will serve
To land at Calais, and to visit you.
King Edward
She shall be welcome, and to wait her coming
I'll pitch my tent near to the sandy shore.
Enter a Captain [of Calais].
Captain of Calais
The burgesses of Calais, mighty king,
Have by a counsel willingly decreed
To yield the town and castle to your hands,
Upon condition it will please your grace
To grant them benefit of life and goods.
King Edward
They will so? Then belike they may command,
Dispose, elect, and govern as they list.
No, sirrah, tell them since they did refuse
Our princely clemency at first proclaimed,
They shall not have it now although they would.
I will accept of naught but fire and sword,
Except, within these two days, six of them
That are the wealthiest merchants in the town
Come naked all but for their linen shirts,
With each a halter hanged about his neck,
And prostrate yield themselves upon their knees
To be afflicted, hanged, or what I please.
And so you may inform their masterships.
Exeunt [all but the Captain].
Captain of Calais
Why, this it is to trust a broken staff.
Had we not been persuaded John our king
Would with his army have relieved the town,
We had not stood upon defiance so.
But now 'tis past that no man can recall,
And better some do go to wrack than all.