Charles
I wonder, Villiers, thou shouldst importune me
For one that is our deadly enemy.
Villiers
Not for his sake, my gracious lord, so much
Am I become an earnest advocate,
As that thereby my ransom will be quit.
Charles
Thy ransom, man? Why needst thou talk of that?
Art thou not free? And are not all occasions
That happen for advantage of our foes
To be accepted of, and stood upon?
Villiers
No, good my lord, except the same be just;
For profit must with honor be commixed,
Or else our actions are but scandalous.
But letting pass these intricate objections,
Will't please your highness to subscribe or no?
Charles
Villiers, I will not nor I cannot do it.
Salisbury shall not have his will so much
To claim a passport how it pleaseth himself.
Villiers
Why then I know the extremity, my lord:
I must return to prison whence I came.
Charles
Return! I hope thou wilt not.
What bird that hath escaped the fowler's gin
Will not beware how she's ensnared again?
Or what is he so senseless and secure
That, having hardly passed a dangerous gulf,
Will put himself in peril there again?
Villiers
Ah, but it is mine oath, my gracious lord,
Which I in conscience may not violate,
Or else a kingdom should not draw me hence.
Charles
Thine oath! Why that doth bind thee to abide.
Hast thou not sworn obedience to thy prince?
Villiers
In all things that uprightly he commands.
But either to persuade or threaten me
Not to perform the covenant of my word
Is lawless, and I need not to obey.
Charles
Why, is it lawful for a man to kill,
And not to break a promise with his foe?
Villiers
To kill, my lord, when war is once proclaimed,
So that our quarrel be for wrongs received,
No doubt is lawfully permitted us;
But in an oath we must be well advised
How we do swear, and, when we once have sworn,
Not to infringe it though we die therefor.
Therefore, my lord, as willing I return
As if I were to fly to paradise.
Charles
Stay, my Villiers, thine honorable mind
Deserves to be eternally admired;
Thy suit shall be no longer thus deferred --
Give me the paper; I'll subscribe to it,
And wheretofore I loved thee as Villiers,
Hereafter I'll embrace thee as myself.
Stay, and be still in favor with thy lord.
Villiers
I humbly thank your grace; I must dispatch
And send this passport first unto the earl,
And then I will attend your highness' pleasure.
Charles
Do so, Villiers; and, Charles, when he hath need,
Be such his soldiers, howsoever he speed.
Exit Villiers.
Enter King John.
King John
Come, Charles, and arm thee: Edward is entrapped.
The Prince of Wales is fall'n into our hands,
And we have compassed him -- he cannot scape.
Charles
But will your highness fight today?
King John
What else, my son? He's scarce eight thousand strong
And we are threescore thousand at the least.
Charles
I have a prophecy, my gracious lord,
Wherein is written what success is like
To happen us in this outrageous war.
It was delivered me at Crécy's field
By one that is an aged hermit there:
[Reads] 'When feathered fowl shall make thine army tremble,
And flintstones rise and break the battle 'ray,
Then think on him that doth not now dissemble,
For that shall be the hapless dreadful day;
Yet in the end thy foot thou shalt advance,
As far in England as thy foe in France.'
King John
By this it seems we shall be fortunate.
For as it is impossible that stones
Should ever rise and break the battle 'ray,
Or airy fowl make men in arms to quake,
So is it like we shall not be subdued.
Or say this might be true, yet in the end,
Since he doth promise we shall drive him hence
And forage their country as they have done ours,
By this revenge that loss will seem the less.
But all are frivolous fancies, toys and dreams;
Once we are sure we have ensnared the son,
Catch we the father after how we can.