Prince
Now John in France, and lately John of France,
Thy bloody ensigns are my captive colors,
And you, high vaunting Charles of Normandy,
That once today sent me a horse to fly,
Are now the subjects of my clemency.
Fie, lords, is't not a shame that English boys,
Whose early days are yet not worth a beard,
Should in the bosom of your kingdom thus,
One against twenty, beat you up together?
King John
Thy fortune, not thy force, hath conquered us.
Prince
An argument that heaven aids the right.
[Enter Artois, with Philip as prisoner.]
See, see, Artois doth bring with him along
The late good counsel-giver to my soul.
Welcome, Artois, and welcome Philip too.
Who now, of you or I, have need to pray?
Now is the proverb verified in you:
Too bright a morning breeds a louring day.
Sound trumpets; enter Audley [led by the two Esquires].
But say, what grim discouragement comes here?
Alas, what thousand armèd men of France
Have writ that note of death in Audley's face?
Speak thou, that woost death with thy careless smile
And lookst so merrily upon thy grave
As if thou wert enamored on thine end:
What hungry sword hath so bereaved thy face
And lopped a true friend from my loving soul?
Audley
O Prince, thy sweet bemoaning speech to me
Is as a mournful knell to one dead sick.
Prince
Dear Audley, if my tongue ring out thy end,
My arms shall be thy grave. What may I do
To win thy life or to revenge thy death?
If thou wilt drink the blood of captive kings,
Or that it were restorative, command
A health of kings' blood, and I'll drink to thee.
If honor may dispense for thee with death,
The never-dying honor of this day
Share wholly, Audley, to thyself and live.
Audley
Victorious Prince, that thou art so, behold
A caesar's fame in kings' captivity.
If I could hold dim death but at a bay
Till I did see my liege, thy royal father,
My soul should yield this castle of my flesh,
This mangled tribute with all willingness
To darkness, consummation, dust and worms.
Prince
Cheerily, bold man; thy soul is all too proud
To yield her city for one little breach,
Should be divorcèd from her earthly spouse
By the soft temper of a Frenchman's sword.
Lo, to repair thy life I give to thee
Three thousand marks a year in English land.
Audley
I take thy gift to pay the debts I owe:
These two poor esquires redeemed me from the French
With lusty and dear hazard of their lives;
What thou hast given me I give to them,
And as thou lov'st me, Prince, lay thy consent
To this bequeath in my last testament.
Prince
Renownèd Audley, live and have from me
This gift twice doubled to these esquires and thee;
But live or die, what thou hast given away
To these and theirs shall lasting freedom stay.
Come, gentlemen, I will see my friend bestowed
Within an easy litter; then we'll march
Proudly toward Calais with triumphant pace
Unto my royal father; and there bring
The tribute of my wars, fair France his king. 