Lodowick
I might perceive his eye in her eye lost,
His ear to drink her sweet tongue's utterance,
And changing passions, like inconstant clouds
That rack upon the carriage of the winds,
Increase and die in his disturbèd cheeks.
Lo, when she blushed, even then did he look pale,
As if her cheeks by some enchanted power
Attracted had the cherry blood from his;
Anon, with reverent fear when she grew pale,
His cheeks put on their scarlet ornaments,
But no more like her oriental red
Than brick to coral, or live things to dead.
Why did he then thus counterfeit her looks?
If she did blush, 'twas tender modest shame,
Being in the sacred presence of a king;
If he did blush, 'twas red immodest shame
To vail his eyes amiss being a king;
If she looked pale, 'twas silly woman's fear
To bear herself in presence of a king;
If he looked pale, it was with guilty fear
To dote amiss being a mighty king.
Then Scottish wars, farewell; I fear 'twill prove
A ling'ring English siege of peevish love.
Here comes his highness walking all alone.
Enter King Edward.
King Edward
She is grown more fairer far since I came hither,
Her voice more silver every word than other,
Her wit more fluent; what a strange discourse
Unfolded she of David and his Scots!
'Even thus,' quoth she, 'he spake' -- and then spoke broad,
With epithets and accents of the Scot,
But somewhat better than the Scot could speak;
'And thus quoth she' -- and answered then herself,
For who could speak like her? But she herself
Breathes from the wall an angel's note from heaven
Of sweet defiance to her barbarous foes.
When she would talk of peace methinks her tongue
Commanded war to prison; when of war,
It wakened Caesar from his Roman grave
To hear war beautified by her discourse.
Wisdom is foolishness but in her tongue,
Beauty a slander but in her fair face,
There is no summer but in her cheerful looks,
Nor frosty winter but in her disdain.
I cannot blame the Scots that did besiege her
For she is all the treasure of our land;
But call them cowards that they ran away,
Having so rich and fair a cause to stay. --
Art thou there, Lod'wick? Give me ink and paper.
Lodowick
I will, my liege.
King Edward
And bid the lords hold on their play at chess
For we will walk and meditate alone.
Lodowick
I will, my sovereign.
Exit [Lodowick].
King Edward
This fellow is well read in poetry,
And hath a lusty and persuasive spirit;
I will acquaint him with my passion,
Which he shall shadow with a veil of lawn
Through which the queen of beauty's queen shall see
Herself the ground of my infirmity.
Enter Lodowick.
Hast thou pen, ink and paper ready, Lodowick?
Lodowick
Ready, my liege.
King Edward
Then in the summer arbor sit by me,
Make it our council house or cabinet;
Since green our thoughts, green be the conventicle
Where we will ease us by disburd'ning them.
Now, Lod'wick, invocate some golden muse
To bring thee hither an enchanted pen
That may for sighs set down true sighs indeed;
Talking of grief, to make thee ready groan,
And when thou writ'st of tears, encouch the word
Before and after with such sweet laments
That it may raise drops in a Tartar's eye,
And make a flint-heart Scythian pitiful --
For so much moving hath a poet's pen.
Then if thou be a poet, move thou so,
And be enrichèd by thy sovereign's love;
For if the touch of sweet concordant strings
Could force attendance in the ears of hell,
How much more shall the strains of poets' wit
Beguile and ravish soft and humane minds?
Lodowick
To whom, my lord, shall I direct my style?
King Edward
To one that shames the fair and sots the wise;
Whose body is an abstract or a brief,
Contains each general virtue in the world.
Better than beautiful thou must begin,
Devise for fair a fairer word than fair,
And every ornament that thou wouldst praise
Fly it a pitch above the soar of praise.
For flattery fear thou not to be convicted,
For were thy admiration ten times more,
Ten times ten thousand more the worth exceeds
Of that thou art to praise thy praise's worth.
Begin -- I will to contemplate the while.
Forget not to set down how passionate,
How heart-sick and how full of languishment
Her beauty makes me.
Lodowick
Write I to a woman?
King Edward
What beauty else could triumph on me,
Or who but women do our love-lays greet?
What, thinkst thou I did bid thee praise a horse?
Lodowick
Of what condition or estate she is
'Twere requisite that I should know, my lord.
King Edward
Of such estate, that hers is as a throne,
And my estate the footstool where she treads;
Then mayst thou judge what her condition is
By the proportion of her mightiness.
Write on, while I peruse her in my thoughts. --
Her voice to music or the nightingale?
To music every summer-leaping swain
Compares his sunburnt lover when she speaks;
And why should I speak of the nightingale?
The nightingale sings of adulterate wrong,
And that, compared, is too satirical,
For sin, though sin, would not be so esteemed,
But rather virtue sin, sin virtue deemed.
Her hair far softer than the silkworm's twist,
Like to a flattering glass doth make more fair
The yellow amber -- 'like a flattering glass'
Comes in too soon; for writing of her eyes,
I'll say that like a glass they catch the sun,
And thence the hot reflection doth rebound
Against my breast and burns my heart within.
Ah, what a world of descant makes my soul
Upon this voluntary ground of love!
Come, Lod'wick, hast thou turned thy ink to gold?
If not, write but in letters capital
My mistress' name and it will gild thy paper;
Read, lord, read,
Fill thou the empty hollows of mine ears
With the sweet hearing of thy poetry.
Lodowick
I have not to a period brought her praise.
King Edward
Her praise is as my love, both infinite,
Which apprehend such violent extremes
That they disdain an ending period.
Her beauty hath no match but my affection,
Hers more than most, mine most, and more than more,
Hers more to praise than tell the sea by drops,
Nay, more than drop, the massy earth by sands,
And sand by sand, print them in memory;
Then wherefore talkst thou of a period
To that which craves unended admiration?
Read, let us hear.
Lodowick
'More fair and chaste than is the queen of shades' --
King Edward
That line hath two faults, gross and palpable:
Compar'st thou her to the pale queen of night,
Who being set in dark seems therefore light?
What is she, when the sun lifts up his head,
But like a fading taper, dim and dead?
My love shall brave the eye of heaven at noon,
And, being unmasked, outshine the golden sun.
Lodowick
What is the other fault, my sovereign lord?
King Edward
Read o'er the line again.
Lodowick
'More fair and chaste' --
King Edward
I did not bid thee talk of chastity
To ransack so the treasure of her mind,
For I had rather have her chased than chaste.
Out with the moon line, I will none of it,
And let me have her likened to the sun:
Say she hath thrice more splendor than the sun,
That her perfections emulates the sun,
That she breeds sweets as plenteous as the sun,
That she doth thaw cold winter like the sun,
That she doth cheer fresh summer like the sun,
That she doth dazzle gazers like the sun,
And in this application to the sun
Bid her be free and general as the sun,
Who smiles upon the basest weed that grows
As lovingly as on the fragrant rose.
Let's see what follows that same moonlight line.
Lodowick
'More fair and chaste than is the queen of shades,
More bold in constancy' --
King Edward
In constancy than who?
Lodowick
'Than Judith was.'
King Edward
Oh, monstrous line! Put in the next a sword
And I shall woo her to cut off my head!
Blot, blot, good Lod'wick; let us hear the next.
Lodowick
There's all that yet is done.
King Edward
I thank thee then thou hast done little ill,
But what is done is passing passing ill.
No, let the captain talk of boist'rous war,
The prisoner of immurèd dark constraint,
The sick man best sets down the pangs of death,
The man that starves the sweetness of a feast,
The frozen soul the benefit of fire,
And every grief his happy opposite;
Love cannot sound well but in lovers' tongues.
Give me the pen and paper, I will write.
Enter Countess.
But soft, here comes the treasurer of my spirit --
Lod'wick, thou knowst not how to draw a battle:
These wings, these flankers, and these squadrons
Argue in thee defective discipline;
Thou shouldst have placed this here, this other here.
Countess
Pardon my boldness, my thrice gracious lords,
Let my intrusion here be called my duty
That comes to see my sovereign how he fares.
King Edward
Go, draw the same, I tell thee in what form.
Lodowick
I go.
Exit [Lodowick].
Countess
Sorry I am to see my liege so sad;
What may thy subject do to drive from thee
Thy gloomy consort, sullen melancholy?
King Edward
Ah, lady, I am blunt and cannot strew
The flowers of solace in a ground of shame;
Since I came hither, Countess, I am wronged.
Countess
Now God forbid that any in my house
Should think my sovereign wrong! Thrice gentle king,
Acquaint me with your cause of discontent.
King Edward
How near then shall I be to remedy?
Countess
As near, my liege, as all my woman's power
Can pawn itself to buy thy remedy.
King Edward
If thou speakst true, then have I my redress;
Engage thy power to redeem my joys,
And I am joyful, Countess, else I die.
Countess
I will, my liege.
King Edward
Swear, Countess, that thou wilt.
Countess
By heaven, I will.
King Edward
Then take thyself a little way aside,
And tell thyself a king doth dote on thee,
Say that within thy power doth lie
To make him happy, and that thou hast sworn
To give him all the joy within thy power;
Do this and tell me when I shall be happy.
Countess
All this is done, my thrice dread sovereign:
That power of love that I have power to give
Thou hast with all devout obedience;
Employ me how thou wilt in proof thereof.
King Edward
Thou hearst me say that I do dote on thee.
Countess
If on my beauty, take it if thou canst;
Though little, I do prize it ten times less.
If on my virtue, take it if thou canst;
For virtue's store by giving doth augment.
Be it on what it will that I can give,
And thou canst take away, inherit it.
King Edward
It is thy beauty that I would enjoy.
Countess
Oh, were it painted I would wipe it off
And dispossess myself to give it thee;
But sovereign, it is soldered to my life,
Take one and both, for like an humble shadow
It haunts the sunshine of my summer's life.
King Edward
But thou mayst leave it me to sport withal.
Countess
As easy may my intellectual soul
Be lent away and yet my body live,
As lend my body, palace to my soul,
Away from her and yet retain my soul.
My body is her bower, her court, her abbey,
And she an angel pure, divine, unspotted;
If I should leave her house, my lord, to thee,
I kill my poor soul and my poor soul me.
King Edward
Didst thou not swear to give me what I would?
Countess
I did, my liege, so what you would, I could.
King Edward
I wish no more of thee than thou mayst give,
Nor beg I do not but I rather buy --
That is, thy love, and for that love of thine
In rich exchange I tender to thee mine.
Countess
But that your lips were sacred, my lord,
You would prophane the holy name of love;
That love you offer me you cannot give,
For Caesar owes that tribute to his queen;
That love you beg of me I cannot give,
For Sarah owes that duty to her lord.
He that doth clip or counterfeit your stamp
Shall die, my lord; and will your sacred self
Commit high treason against the king of heaven
To stamp his image in forbidden metal,
Forgetting your allegiance and your oath?
In violating marriage sacred law
You break a greater honor than yourself;
To be a king is of a younger house
Than to be married; your progenitor,
Sole reigning Adam on the universe,
By God was honored for a married man,
But not by him anointed for a king.
It is a penalty to break your statutes,
Though not enacted with your highness' hand;
How much more to infringe the holy act
Made by the mouth of God, sealed with His hand?
I know my sovereign in my husband's love,
Who now doth loyal service in his wars,
Doth but to try the wife of Salisbury,
Whether she will hear a wanton's tale or no;
Lest being therein guilty by my stay,
From that, not from my liege, I turn away.
Exit [Countess].
King Edward
Whether is her beauty by her words divine,
Or are her words sweet chaplains to her beauty?
Like as the wind doth beautify a sail,
And as a sail becomes the unseen wind,
So do her words her beauty, beauty words.
Oh, that I were a honey-gathering bee
To bear the comb of virtue from this flower,
And not a poison-sucking envious spider
To turn the juice I take to deadly venom.
Religion is austere and beauty gentle,
Too strict a guardian for so fair a ward.
Oh, that she were as is the air to me!
Why so she is, for when I would embrace her,
This do I, and catch nothing but myself;
I must enjoy her, for I cannot beat
With reason and reproof fond love away.
Enter Warwick.
Here comes her father; I will work with him
To bear my colors in this field of love.
Warwick
How is it that my sovereign is so sad?
May I with pardon know your highness' grief?
And that my old endeavor will remove it,
It shall not cumber long your majesty.
King Edward
A kind and voluntary gift thou profferest,
That I was forward to have begged of thee.
But, O thou world, great nurse of flattery,
Why dost thou tip men's tongues with golden words
And peise their deeds with weight of heavy lead,
That fair performance cannot follow promise?
Oh, that a man might hold the heart's close book,
And choke the lavish tongue when it doth utter
The breath of falsehood not charactered there!
Warwick
Far be it from the honor of my age
That I should owe bright gold and render lead;
Age is a cynic, not a flatterer.
I say again, that if I knew your grief
And that by me it may be lessenèd,
My proper harm should buy your highness' good.
King Edward
These are the vulgar tenders of false men
That never pay the duty of their words.
Thou wilt not stick to swear what thou hast said,
But when thou knowest my grief's condition,
This rash disgorgèd vomit of thy word
Thou wilt eat up again and leave me helpless.
Warwick
By heaven, I will not, though your majesty
Did bid me run upon your sword and die.
King Edward
Say that my grief is no way medicinable
But by the loss and bruising of thine honor.
Warwick
If nothing but that loss may vantage you,
I would account that loss my vantage too.
King Edward
Thinkst that thou canst answer thy oath again?
Warwick
I cannot, nor I would not if I could.
King Edward
But if thou dost, what shall I say to thee?
Warwick
What may be said to any perjured villain
That breaks the sacred warrant of an oath.
King Edward
What wilt thou say to one that breaks an oath?
Warwick
That he hath broke his faith with God and man,
And from them both stands excommunicate.
King Edward
What office were it to suggest a man
To break a lawful and religious vow?
Warwick
An office for the devil not for man.
King Edward
That devil's office must thou do for me,
Or break thy oath or cancel all the bonds
Of love and duty 'twixt thyself and me.
And therefore, Warwick, if thou art thyself,
The lord and master of thy word and oath,
Go to thy daughter and in my behalf
Command her, woo her, win her any ways
To be my mistress and my secret love.
I will not stand to hear thee make reply --
Thy oath break hers or let thy sovereign die.
Exit [King Edward.]
Warwick
O doting king, O detestable office!
Well may I tempt myself to wrong myself
When he hath sworn me by the name of God
To break a vow made by the name of God.
What if I swear by this right hand of mine
To cut this right hand off? The better way
Were to prophane the idol than confound it.
But neither will I do; I'll keep mine oath,
And to my daughter make a recantation
Of all the virtue I have preached to her.
I'll say she must forget her husband Salisbury,
If she remember to embrace the King;
I'll say an oath may easily be broken,
But not so easily pardoned being broken;
I'll say it is true charity to love,
But not true love to be so charitable;
I'll say his greatness may bear out the shame,
But not his kingdom can buy out the sin;
I'll say it is my duty to persuade,
But not her honesty to give consent.
Enter Countess.
See where she comes; was never father had,
Against his child, an embassage so bad.
Countess
My lord and father, I have sought for you;
My mother and the peers importune you
To keep in presence of his majesty,
And do your best to make his highness merry.
Warwick
[Aside] How shall I enter in this graceless errand?
I must not call her child, for where's the father
That will in such a suit seduce his child?
Then 'wife of Salisbury,' shall I so begin?
No, he's my friend, and where is found the friend
That will do friendship such endamagement? --
[To Countess] Neither my daughter, nor my dear friend's wife,
I am not Warwick as thou thinkst I am,
But an attorney from the court of hell,
That thus have housed my spirit in his form
To do a message to thee from the King:
The mighty King of England dotes on thee.
He that hath power to take away thy life,
Hath power to take thine honor, then consent
To pawn thine honor rather than thy life;
Honor is often lost and got again,
But life once gone hath no recovery.
The sun that withers hay doth nourish grass;
The King that would distain thee, will advance thee.
The poets write that great Achilles' spear
Could heal the wound it made: the moral is,
What mighty men misdo, they can amend.
The lion doth become his bloody jaws,
And grace his foragement by being mild
When vassal fear lies trembling at his feet;
The King will in his glory hide thy shame,
And those that gaze on him to find out thee
Will lose their eyesight looking in the sun.
What can one drop of poison harm the sea,
Whose hugy vastures can digest the ill
And make it lose his operation?
The King's great name will temper thy misdeeds,
And give the bitter potion of reproach
A sugared, sweet, and most delicious taste.
Besides it is no harm to do the thing
Which without shame could not be left undone.
Thus have I, in his majesty's behalf,
Apparelled sin in virtuous sentences,
And dwell upon thy answer in his suit.
Countess
Unnatural besiege! Woe me unhappy
To have escaped the danger of my foes
And to be ten times worse envired by friends!
Hath he no means to stain my honest blood,
But to corrupt the author of my blood
To be his scandalous and vile solicitor?
No marvel though the branches be then infected,
When poison hath encompassèd the root;
No marvel though the leprous infant die,
When the stern dame envenometh the dug.
Why then give sin a passport to offend
And youth the dangerous reign of liberty;
Blot out the strict forbidding of the law,
And cancel every canon that prescribes
A shame for shame, or penance for offence.
No, let me die, if his too boist'rous will
Will have it so, before I will consent
To be an actor in his graceless lust.
Warwick
Why now thou speakst as I would have thee speak,
And mark how I unsay my words again:
An honorable grave is more esteemed
Than the polluted closet of a king.
The greater man, the greater is the thing,
Be it good or bad, that he shall undertake:
An unreputed mote, flying in the sun,
Presents a greater substance than it is;
The freshest summer's day doth soonest taint
The loathèd carrion that it seems to kiss;
Deep are the blows made with a mighty axe;
That sin doth ten times aggravate itself
That is committed in a holy place;
An evil deed done by authority
Is sin and subornation; deck an ape
In tissue, and the beauty of the robe
Adds but the greater scorn unto the beast.
A spacious field of reasons could I urge
Between his glory, daughter, and thy shame:
That poison shows worst in a golden cup,
Dark night seems darker by the lightning flash,
Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds,
And every glory that inclines to sin
The shame is treble, by the opposite.
So leave I with my blessing in thy bosom,
Which then convert to a most heavy curse
When thou convertst from honor's golden name
To the black faction of bed-blotting shame.
Countess
I'll follow thee, and when my mind turns so,
My body sink my soul in endless woe.