1 Frenchman
Well met, my masters. How now, what's the news?
And wherefore are ye laden thus with stuff?
What, is it quarter day that you remove,
And carry bag and baggage too?
2 Frenchman
Quarter day, ay, and quartering day I fear.
Have ye not heard the news that flies abroad?
1 Frenchman
What news?
3 Frenchman
How the French navy is destroyed at sea,
And that the English army is arrived.
1 Frenchman
What then?
2 Frenchman
What then, quoth you? Why is't not time to fly,
When envy and destruction is so nigh?
1 Frenchman
Content thee, man; they are far enough from hence,
And will be met, I warrant ye, to their cost
Before they break so far into the realm.
2 Frenchman
Ay, so the grasshopper doth spend the time
In mirthful jollity till winter come,
And then too late he would redeem his time
When frozen cold hath nipped his careless head;
He that no sooner will provide a cloak
Than when he sees it doth begin to rain,
May peradventure, for his negligence,
Be throughly washed when he suspects it not.
We that have charge and such a train as this
Must look in time to look for them and us,
Lest when we would, we cannot be relieved.
1 Frenchman
Belike you then despair of ill success,
And think your country will be subjugate.
3 Frenchman
We cannot tell; 'tis good to fear the worst.
1 Frenchman
Yet rather fight than, like unnatural sons,
Forsake your loving parents in distress.
2 Frenchman
Tush, they that have already taken arms
Are many fearful millions in respect
Of that small handful of our enemies.
But 'tis a rightful quarrel must prevail:
Edward is son unto our late king's sister,
Where John Valois is three degrees removed.
Woman
Besides, there goes a prophecy abroad,
Published by one that was a friar once,
Whose oracles have many times proved true,
And now, he says, the time will shortly come
Whenas a lion rousèd in the west
Shall carry hence the fleur-de-lis of France.
These I can tell ye, and such like surmises
Strike many Frenchmen cold unto the heart.
Enter a Frenchman.
4 Frenchman
Fly, countrymen and citizens of France!
Sweet flow'ring peace, the root of happy life,
Is quite abandoned and expulsed the land,
Instead of whom, ransack-constraining war
Sits like to ravens upon your houses' tops.
Slaughter and mischief walk within your streets
And unrestrained make havoc as they pass,
The form whereof even now myself beheld,
Upon this fair mountain whence I came:
For so far off as I directed mine eyes,
I might perceive five cities all on fire,
Cornfields and vineyards burning like an oven;
And as the leaking vapor in the wind
Turned but aside I likewise might discern
The poor inhabitants, escaped the flame,
Fall numberless upon the soldiers' pikes.
Three ways these dreadful ministers of wrath
Do tread the measures of their tragic march:
Upon the right hand comes the conquering king,
Upon the left his hot unbridled son,
And in the midst their nation's glittering host;
All which, though distant, yet conspire in one
To leave a desolation where they come.
Fly, therefore, citizens. If you be wise,
Seek out some habitation further off;
Here if you stay, your wives will be abused,
Your treasure shared before your weeping eyes.
Shelter yourselves for now the storm doth rise.
Away, away! Methinks I hear their drums.
Ah, wretched France, I greatly fear thy fall,
Thy glory shaketh like a tottering wall.