King Edward
Where's the Frenchman by whose cunning guide
We found the shallow of this River Somme,
And had direction how to pass the sea?
Gobin
Here, my good lord.
King Edward
How art thou called? Tell me thy name.
Gobin
Gobin de Grace, if please your excellence.
King Edward
Then, Gobin, for the service thou hast done,
We here enlarge and give thee liberty;
And, for recompense beside this good,
Thou shalt receive five hundred marks in gold. --
I know not how we should have met our son,
Whom now in heart I wish I might behold.
Enter Artois.
Artois
Good news, my lord: the prince is hard at hand,
And with him comes Lord Audley and the rest,
Whom since our landing we could never meet.
Enter Prince Edward, Lord Audley and soldiers.
King Edward
Welcome, fair prince; how hast thou sped, my son,
Since thy arrival on the coast of France?
Prince
Successfully, I thank the gracious heavens.
Some of their strongest cities we have won,
As Barfleur, Lô, Crotoy and Carentan,
And others wasted, leaving at our heels
A wide apparent field and beaten path
For solitariness to progress in.
Yet those that would submit we kindly pardoned,
For who in scorn refused our proffered peace
Endured the penalty of sharp revenge.
King Edward
Ah France, why shouldst thou be this obstinate
Against the kind embracement of thy friends?
How gently had we thought to touch thy breast
And set our foot upon thy tender mould,
But that in froward and disdainful pride
Thou, like a skittish and untamèd colt,
Dost start aside and strike us with thy heels.
But tell me Ned, in all thy warlike course,
Hast thou not seen the usurping King of France?
Prince
Yes, my good lord, and not two hours ago,
With full a hundred thousand fighting men
Upon the one side of the river's bank,
And on the other, both his multitudes.
I feared he would have cropped our smaller power,
But happily, perceiving your approach,
He hath withdrawn himself to Crécy plains,
Where, as it seemeth by his good array,
He means to bid us battle presently.
King Edward
He shall be welcome -- that's the thing we crave.
Enter King John, [Prince Charles] Duke of Normandy, Lorraine, King of
Bohemia, young [Prince] Philip, and soldiers.
King John
Edward, know that John, the true King of France,
Musing thou shouldst encroach upon his land
And in thy tyrannous proceeding slay
His faithful subjects and subvert his towns,
Spits in thy face, and in this manner following
Upbraids thee with thine arrogant intrusion.
First, I condemn thee for a fugitive,
A thievish pirate, and a needy mate --
One that hath either no abiding place,
Or else, inhabiting some barren soil
Where neither herb or fruitful grain is had,
Dost altogether live by pilfering.
Next, insomuch thou hast infringed thy faith,
Broke league and solemn covenant made with me,
I hold thee for a false pernicious wretch.
And last of all, although I scorn to cope
With one so much inferior to myself,
Yet in respect thy thirst is all for gold,
Thy labor rather to be feared than loved,
To satisfy thy lust in either part
Here am I come, and with me have I brought
Exceeding store of treasure, pearl and coin.
Leave therefore now to persecute the weak,
And armèd ent'ring conflict with the armed,
Let it be seen 'mongst other petty thefts
How thou canst win this pillage manfully.
King Edward
If gall or wormwood have a pleasant taste,
Then is thy salutation honey-sweet;
But as the one hath no such property,
So is the other most satirical.
Yet wot how I regard thy worthless taunts:
If thou have uttered them to foil my fame
Or dim the reputation of my birth,
Know that thy wolvish barking cannot hurt;
If slyly to insinuate with the world,
And with a strumpet's artificial line
To paint thy vicious and deformèd cause,
Be well assured the counterfeit will fade,
And in the end thy foul defects be seen.
But if thou didst it to provoke me on,
As who should say I were but timorous
Or, coldly negligent, did need a spur,
Bethink thyself how slack I was at sea.
Now since my landing I have won no towns,
Entered no further but upon the coast,
And there have ever since securely slept;
But if I have been otherwise employed,
Imagine, Valois, whether I intend
To skirmish not for pillage, but for the crown
Which thou dost wear, and that I vow to have,
Or one of us shall fall into his grave.
Prince
Look not for cross invectives at our hands
Or railing execrations of despite.
Let creeping serpents hid in hollow banks
Sting with their tongues; we have remorseless swords,
And they shall plead for us and our affairs.
Yet, thus much briefly, by my father's leave:
As all the immodest poison of thy throat
Is scandalous and most notorious lies,
And our pretended quarrel is truly just,
So end the battle when we meet today --
May either of us prosper and prevail,
Or luckless cursed, receive eternal shame.
King Edward
That needs no further question, and I know
His conscience witnesseth it is my right.
Therefore Valois, say, wilt thou yet resign
Before the sickle's thrust into the corn,
Or that enkindled fury turn to flame?
King John
Edward, I know what right thou hast in France,
And, ere I basely will resign my crown,
This champion field shall be a pool of blood
And all our prospect as a slaughterhouse.
Prince
Ay, that approves thee, tyrant, what thou art:
No father, king, or shepherd of thy realm,
But one that tears her entrails with thy hands,
And like a thirsty tiger suckst her blood.
Audley
You peers of France, why do you follow him
That is so prodigal to spend your lives?
Charles
Whom should they follow, agèd impotent,
But he that is their true-born sovereign?
King Edward
Upbraidst thou him, because within his face
Time hath engraved deep characters of age?
Know that these grave scholars of experience,
Like stiff-grown oaks, will stand immovable
When whirlwind quickly turns up younger trees.
Derby
Was ever any of thy father's house
King,
but thyself, before this present time?
Edward's great lineage, by the mother's side,
Five hundred years hath held the sceptre up;
Judge then, conspirators, by this descent
Which is the true-born sovereign, this or that.
Philip
Father, range your battles, prate no more;
These English fain would spend the time in words
That, night approaching, they might escape unfought.
King John
Lords and my loving subjects, now's the time
That your intended force must bide the touch.
Therefore, my friends, consider this in brief:
He that you fight for is your natural king,
He against whom you fight a foreigner;
He that you fight for rules in clemency
And reins you with a mild and gentle bit,
He against whom you fight, if he prevail
Will straight enthrone himself in tyranny,
Make slaves of you, and with a heavy hand
Curtail and curb your sweetest liberty.
Then to protect your country and your king,
Let but the haughty courage of your hearts
Answer the number of your able hands,
And we shall quickly chase these fugitives.
For what's this Edward but a belly-god,
A tender and lascivious wantonness,
That th'other day was almost dead for love?
And what, I pray you, is his goodly guard?
Such as, but scant them of their chines of beef
And take away their downy featherbeds,
And presently they are as resty-stiff
As 'twere a many overridden jades.
Then, Frenchmen, scorn that such should be your lords,
And rather bind ye them in captive bands.
All French
Vive le roi! God save King John of France!
King John
Now on this plain of Crécy spread yourselves,
And, Edward, when thou dar'st, begin the fight.
[Exeunt King John, King of Bohemia and all the French.]
King Edward
We presently will meet thee, John of France.
And, English lords, let us resolve the day,
Either to clear us of that scandalous crime,
Or be entombèd in our innocence.
And, Ned, because this battle is the first
That ever yet thou fought'st in pitchèd field,
As ancient custom is of martialists
To dub thee with the type of chivalry,
In solemn manner we will give thee arms.
Come therefore, heralds: orderly bring forth
A strong attirement for the Prince, my son.
Enter four heralds bringing in a coat [of] armor, a helmet, a
lance, and a shield.
Edward Plantagenet, in the name of God,
As with this armor I impall thy breast,
So be thy noble unrelenting heart
Walled in with flint of matchless fortitude,
That never base affections enter there.
Fight and be valiant, conquer where thou com'st.
Now follow, lords, and do him honor too.
Derby
Edward Plantagenet, Prince of Wales,
As I do set this helmet on thy head,
Wherewith the chamber of this brain is fenced,
So may thy temples with Bellona's hand
Be still adorned with laurel victory.
Fight and be valiant, conquer where thou com'st.
Audley
Edward Plantagenet, Prince of Wales,
Receive this lance into thy manly hand,
Use it in fashion of a brazen pen
To draw forth bloody stratagems in France
And print thy valiant deeds in honor's book.
Fight and be valiant, conquer where thou com'st.
Artois
Edward Plantagenet, Prince of Wales,
Hold, take this target, wear it on thy arm
And may the view thereof, like Perseus' shield,
Astonish and transform thy gazing foes
To senseless images of meager death.
Fight and be valiant, conquer where thou com'st.
King Edward
Now wants there naught but knighthood, which deferred
We leave till thou hast won it in the field.
Prince
My gracious father and ye forward peers,
This honor you have done me animates
And cheers my green, yet scarce appearing, strength
With comfortable good-presaging signs,
No otherwise than did old Jacob's words,
Whenas he breathed his blessings on his sons.
These hallowed gifts of yours when I prophane,
Or use them not to glory of my God,
To patronage the fatherless and poor,
Or for the benefit of England's peace,
Be numb my joints, wax feeble both mine arms,
Wither my heart that, like a sapless tree,
I may remain the map of infamy.
King Edward
Then thus our steelèd battles shall be ranged:
The leading of the vaward, Ned, is thine,
To dignify whose lusty spirit the more
We temper it with Audley's gravity,
That, courage and experience joined in one,
Your manage may be second unto none.
For the main battles, I will guide myself,
And Derby in the rearward march behind.
That orderly disposed and set in 'ray,
Let us to horse and God grant us the day. 