Oh, Lorraine, say, what mean our men to fly?
Our number is far greater than our foes.
Lorraine
The garrison of Genoese, my lord,
That came from Paris, weary with their march,
Grudging to be suddenly employed,
No sooner in the forefront took their place
But straight retiring so dismayed the rest,
As likewise they betook themselves to flight;
In which, for haste to make a safe escape,
More in the clustering throng are pressed to death
Than by the enemy, a thousandfold.
King John
O hapless fortune! Let us yet assay
If we can counsel some of them to stay.
Exeunt.
Enter King Edward and Audley.
King Edward
Lord Audley, whiles our son is in the chase,
Withdraw our powers unto this little hill,
And here a season let us breathe ourselves.
Audley
I will, my lord.
Exit [Audley].
Sound retreat.
King Edward
Just-dooming heaven, whose secret providence
To our gross judgement is inscrutable,
How are we bound to praise thy wondrous works
That hast this day given way unto the right,
And made the wicked stumble at themselves.
Enter Artois.
Artois
Rescue, King Edward, rescue for thy son!
King Edward
Rescue, Artois? What, is he prisoner?
Or by violence fell beside his horse?
Artois
Neither, my lord, but narrowly beset
With turning Frenchmen whom he did pursue,
As 'tis impossible that he should scape
Except your highness presently descend.
King Edward
Tut, let him fight; we gave him arms today,
And he is laboring for a knighthood, man.
Enter Derby.
Derby
The Prince, my lord, the Prince! Oh, succor him!
He's close encompassed with a world of odds.
King Edward
Then will he win a world of honor too,
If he by valor can redeem him thence;
If not, what remedy? We have more sons
Than one to comfort our declining age.
Enter Audley.
Audley
Renownèd Edward, give me leave, I pray,
To lead my soldiers where I may relieve
Your grace's son, in danger to be slain.
The snares of French, like emmets on a bank,
Muster about him whilst he, lion-like,
Entangled in the net of their assaults,
Franticly rends and bites the woven toil;
But all in vain, he cannot free himself.
King Edward
Audley, content; I will not have a man,
On pain of death, sent forth to succor him.
This is the day, ordained by destiny,
To season his courage with those grievous thoughts,
That, if he breaketh out, Nestor's years on earth
Will make him savor still of this exploit.
Derby
Ah, but he shall not live to see those days.
King Edward
Why then his epitaph is lasting praise.
Audley
Yet, good my lord, 'tis too much willfulness
To let his blood be spilt that may be saved.
King Edward
Exclaim no more, for none of you can tell
Whether a borrowed aid will serve or no.
Perhaps he is already slain or ta'en;
And dare a falcon when she's in her flight,
And ever after she'll be haggard-like.
Let Edward be delivered by our hands
And still in danger he'll expect the like;
But if himself, himself redeem from thence,
He will have vanquished, cheerful, death and fear,
And ever after dread their force no more
Than if they were but babes or captive slaves.
Audley
O cruel father! Farewell Edward, then.
Derby
Farewell, sweet prince, the hope of chivalry.
Artois
Oh, would my life might ransom him from death.
[Retreat sounded within.]
King Edward
But soft, methinks I hear
The dismal charge of trumpets' loud retreat.
All are not slain, I hope, that went with him,
Some will return with tidings, good or bad.
Enter Prince Edward in triumph, bearing in his hand his shivered lance, and [the body of] the King of Bohemia, born before,
wrapped in the colors. They run and embrace him.
Audley
Oh, joyful sight -- victorious Edward lives!
Derby
Welcome, brave prince.
King Edward
Welcome, Plantagenet.
[Prince Edward] kneels and kisses his father's hand.
Prince
First, having done my duty as beseemed,
Lords, I regreet you all with hearty thanks.
And now, behold, after my winter's toil,
My painful voyage on the boist'rous sea
Of war's devouring gulfs and steely rocks,
I bring my fraught unto the wishèd port,
My summer's hope, my travel's sweet reward.
And here with humble duty I present
This sacrifice, this first fruit of my sword,
Cropped and cut down even at the gate of death:
The King of Boheme, father, whom I slew,
Whose thousands had entrenched me round about,
And lay as thick upon my battered crest
As on an anvil with their ponderous glaives.
Yet marble courage still did underprop,
And when my weary arms with often blows,
Like the continual laboring woodman's axe
That is enjoined to fell a load of oaks,
Began to falter, straight I would recover
My gifts you gave me and my zealous vow,
And then new courage made me fresh again;
That, in despite, I carved my passage forth
And put the multitude to speedy flight.
[Prince Edward's] sword born by a soldier.
Lo, thus hath Edward's hand filled your request
And done, I hope, the duty of a knight.
King Edward
Ay, well thou hast deserved a knighthood, Ned.
And therefore with thy sword, yet reeking warm
With blood of those that fought to be thy bane,
Arise, Prince Edward, trusty knight at arms.
This day thou hast confounded me with joy
And proved thyself fit heir unto a king.
Prince
Here is a note, my gracious lord, of those
That in this conflict of our foes were slain:
Eleven princes of esteem, fourscore barons,
A hundred and twenty knights, and thirty thousand
Common soldiers; and of our men, a thousand.
King Edward
Our God be praised! Now, John of France, I hope
Thou knowst King Edward for no wantonness,
No love-sick cockney, nor his soldiers' jades.
But which way is the fearful king escaped?
Prince
Towards Poitiers, noble father -- and his sons.
King Edward
Ned, thou and Audley shall pursue them still,
Myself and Derby will to Calais straight,
And there begirt that haven town with siege.
Now lies it on an upshot, therefore strike,
And wistly follow whiles the game's on foot.
What picture's this?
Prince
A pelican, my lord,
Wounding her bosom with her crookèd beak,
That so her nest of young ones might be fed
With drops of blood that issue from her heart.
The motto, Sic et vos: 'And so should you.'
Exeunt.
=

