Enter Lord Mountford with a coronet in his hand, with him
the Earl of Salisbury.
Mountford
My lord of Salisbury, since by your aid
Mine enemy, Sir Charles of Blois, is slain
And I again am quietly possessed
In Brittany's dukedom, know that I resolve,
For this kind furtherance of your king and you,
To swear allegiance to his majesty.
In sign whereof receive this coronet;
Bear it unto him, and withal mine oath
Never to be but Edward's faithful friend.
Salisbury
I take it, Mountford; thus I hope ere long
The whole dominions of the realm of France
Will be surrendered to his conquering hand.
Exit [Mountford.]
Now, if I knew but safely how to pass,
I would at Calais gladly meet his grace,
Whither I am by letters certified
That he intends to have his host removed.
It shall be so, this policy will serve. --
Ho, who's within? Bring Villiers to me.
Enter Villiers.
Villiers, thou knowst thou art my prisoner,
And that I might for ransom, if I would,
Require of thee a hundred thousand francs,
Or else retain and keep thee captive still.
But so it is, that for a smaller charge,
Thou mayst be quit and if thou wilt thyself.
And this it is: procure me but a passport
Of Charles the Duke of Normandy, that I,
Without restraint, may have recourse to Calais
Through all the countries where he hath to do --
Which thou mayst easily obtain, I think,
By reason I have often heard thee say
He and thou were students once together.
And then thou shalt be set at liberty.
How sayst thou? Wilt thou undertake to do it?
Villiers
I will, my lord, but I must speak with him.
Salisbury
Why, so thou shalt. Take horse and post from hence.
Only, before thou go'st, swear by thy faith
That if thou canst not compass my desire
Thou wilt return my prisoner back again,
And that shall be sufficient warrant for me.
Villiers
To that condition I agree, my lord,
And will unfeignedly perform the same.
Exit [Villiers].
Salisbury
Farewell, Villiers.
Thus once I mean to try a Frenchman's faith.